Title: 'SNL' slammed for 'classless' United Healthcare murder segment on 'Weekend Update'

"Saturday Night Live" swung at and missed with some of their audience this weekend.

The sketch comedy show came under fire after spending nearly a minute and a half of its "Weekend Update" segment discussing the recent murder of UnitedHealthcare CEO Brian Thompson, including America's fascination with the alleged gunman's appearance.

"The manhunt continues for the assassin who gunned down the CEO of United Healthcare on Wednesday, and it really says something about America that a guy was murdered in cold blood and the two main reactions were, ‘Yeah, well health care stinks!’ And also, ‘Girl, that shooter hot,'" co-host Colin Jost quipped.

ELON MUSK SLAMS 'UNFUNNY' SNL SKITS AFTER BEING ACCUSED OF MAKING COMEDIAN CRY

Users on several social media platforms voiced their disdain of the commentary, condemning it for a lack of consideration of Thompson's family. The businessman, 50, and his wife had two sons together.

"Disgusting. I couldn't watch this segment. The victim's family and friends are very much grieving right now," one person wrote beneath a YouTube clip of the segment. "Agreed. I don't usually watch SNL, and I can see by the segment and comments supporting it, that I will no longer be watching it. Joking about someone's murder like that is absolutely disgusting… a family is grieving right now," a person responded.

MANHUNT FOR UNITEDHEALTHCARE CEO MURDER SUSPECT BEGINS 5TH DAY

"I mean is the shooter single??" another user commented, affirming Jost's narrative. A day after the brutal Wednesday shooting, the NYPD released their first image of the suspected gunman without a mask, seen smiling.

"New York City police say that they were able to get the smiling picture of the suspect after the man apparently was caught on camera at a local hostel, flirting with a female employee, whose name has been reported as, ‘Lucky S. Bechalive,'" co-host Michael Che joked.

"Classless," a user on X wrote. "Long time viewer of SNL. I don't consider myself particularly [sensitive] to any topic, but in today's Weekend Update edition they made jokes about the United Health CEO gunned down in NYC. That was really distasteful and disrespectful. SNL, you need to do better," another spewed.

LIKE WHAT YOU’RE READING? CLICK HERE FOR MORE ENTERTAINMENT NEWS

Jost also took aim at officials, in particular, the NYPD.

"This week, New York City officials sent a tough message on crime: ‘If you shoot somebody in the middle of the street, you better get on your bike, hop on a bus, and get the heck out of here, mister,’" he began.

"It's also so crazy that the shooting happened three blocks from here in broad daylight, and the guy just bicycled away. Probably because they have every cop in the city guarding our Christmas tree," Jost said, referencing the Christmas Tree Lighting at Rockefeller Plaza, which occurred on the same day.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR THE ENTERTAINMENT NEWSLETTER

"The NYPD now believes the suspect left the city on a bus from Port Authority. Thanks, but a Port Authority passenger who looks like a murderer actually widens the search," Jost said as his final joke on the topic. Additional viewers found the segment to be amusing, with several enjoying the Port Authority joke.

Representatives for "Saturday Night Live" did not immediately return Fox News Digital's request for comment.

CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP