
    Article's Title:
    Fact check: Trump’s false birthright citizenship claim repeats old lies on ‘Meet the Press,’
    
    Article's Text:
    Washington CNN —

President-elect Donald Trump repeated numerous false claims during an interview that aired Sunday on NBC’s “Meet the Press” – including his old lie that the US is the world’s only country with birthright citizenship.

Trump reiterated his intention to try to end birthright citizenship, in which, under the 14th Amendment to the Constitution, someone born in the US is granted automatic citizenship even if their parents are not citizens. And he asserted, “We’re the only country that has it.”

This is not true; CNN and various other outlets previously debunked the claim when Trump made it during his presidential campaign in 2015 and during his first presidency in 2018. About three dozen countries provide automatic citizenship to people born on their soil, including US neighbors Canada and Mexico and the majority of South American countries.

Here are some other false and misleading claims Trump made in the portion of the interview that NBC aired on television on Sunday morning. (CNN has not yet reviewed the additional chunks of the interview that NBC released online.)

Crime: Trump falsely claimed, “Crime is at an all-time high.” That is nowhere close to true. Both violent crime and property crime rates have plummeted in the US since the early 1990s and are far below all-time highs. FBI data shows that crime declined again in 2023.

Trump’s tariffs: Trump falsely claimed of the tariffs he imposed during his first presidency: “They cost Americans nothing.” Study after study, including one from the federal government’s bipartisan US International Trade Commission, found that Americans bore almost the entire cost of Trump’s tariffs on Chinese products. The tariffs are paid by US importers, not foreign exporters as Trump regularly claims, and it’s easy to find specific examples of companies that passed along the cost of the tariffs to US consumers.

Trump and inflation: Trump falsely claimed that, during his presidency, “We had no inflation.” In fact, cumulative inflation during Trump’s presidency was about 8%.

Biden and inflation: Trump falsely claimed that inflation was so low during his presidency that the Biden administration “didn’t have inflation for a year and a half – they went almost two years, just based on what I had created.” In reality, there was cumulative inflation of about 14% over Joe Biden’s first two years as president; the Biden-era peak for month-over-month inflation, 9.1%, occurred in June 2022, during those first two years.

The 2020 election: Trump vaguely reiterated his lie that he was the real winner of the 2020 election, saying, “I think it’s an easy argument, it was really proven even more conclusively by the win that I had on this one.” His legitimate victory in the 2024 election does not do anything to validate his claims that the 2020 election was stolen,

Migrants and murderers: Trump repeated his frequent false claim there were “13,099 murderers released into our country over the last three years.” In reality, as the Department of Homeland Security and independent experts have noted, that official figure is about immigrants with homicide convictions in the US today who entered the country over decades, including during Trump’s own administration, not over the past three years or solely under the Biden administration. You can read more here.

Venezuela, migration and prisoners: Trump repeated his regular tale about how Venezuela has supposedly emptied prisons to allow criminals to migrate to the US. Trump has never corroborated this claim, and experts have told CNN, PolitiFact and FactCheck.org that they haven’t seen any evidence that it is true.

The European Union and trade: Trump repeated a false claim he has repeatedly made about European countries and trade: “They don’t take our cars, they don’t take our food product, they don’t take anything.”

None of this is true.

The US exported about $368 billion in goods to the European Union in 2023 (while importing about $576 billion from the EU that year), US federal figures show. According to a December 2023 report from the European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association, the EU is the second-largest market for US vehicle exports — importing 271,476 US vehicles in 2022, valued at nearly 9 billion euro. (Some of these are vehicles made by European automakers at plants in the US.) And the US government says the EU was the fifth-largest 2022 export market for US agricultural and related products, behind China, Canada, Mexico and Japan.

Trump and Obamacare: Trump claimed, “I am the one that saved Obamacare.” This is misleading at best. As president, Trump tried to repeal Obamacare but failed because congressional Republicans could not amass enough votes to kill the law in 2017. After that, he and his officials took many steps to weaken the law, though they did continue to operate the Obamacare exchanges – and they refused to defend several central provisions of the law in a lawsuit brought by a coalition of Republican-led states, instead arguing that key parts of Obamacare should be invalidated. You can read more here from CNN’s Tami Luhby. 

    Article's Title:
    'SNL' slammed for 'classless' United Healthcare murder segment on 'Weekend Update'
    
    Article's Text:
    "Saturday Night Live" swung at and missed with some of their audience this weekend.

The sketch comedy show came under fire after spending nearly a minute and a half of its "Weekend Update" segment discussing the recent murder of UnitedHealthcare CEO Brian Thompson, including America's fascination with the alleged gunman's appearance.

"The manhunt continues for the assassin who gunned down the CEO of United Healthcare on Wednesday, and it really says something about America that a guy was murdered in cold blood and the two main reactions were, ‘Yeah, well health care stinks!’ And also, ‘Girl, that shooter hot,'" co-host Colin Jost quipped.

ELON MUSK SLAMS 'UNFUNNY' SNL SKITS AFTER BEING ACCUSED OF MAKING COMEDIAN CRY

Users on several social media platforms voiced their disdain of the commentary, condemning it for a lack of consideration of Thompson's family. The businessman, 50, and his wife had two sons together.

"Disgusting. I couldn't watch this segment. The victim's family and friends are very much grieving right now," one person wrote beneath a YouTube clip of the segment. "Agreed. I don't usually watch SNL, and I can see by the segment and comments supporting it, that I will no longer be watching it. Joking about someone's murder like that is absolutely disgusting… a family is grieving right now," a person responded.

MANHUNT FOR UNITEDHEALTHCARE CEO MURDER SUSPECT BEGINS 5TH DAY

"I mean is the shooter single??" another user commented, affirming Jost's narrative. A day after the brutal Wednesday shooting, the NYPD released their first image of the suspected gunman without a mask, seen smiling.

"New York City police say that they were able to get the smiling picture of the suspect after the man apparently was caught on camera at a local hostel, flirting with a female employee, whose name has been reported as, ‘Lucky S. Bechalive,'" co-host Michael Che joked.

"Classless," a user on X wrote. "Long time viewer of SNL. I don't consider myself particularly [sensitive] to any topic, but in today's Weekend Update edition they made jokes about the United Health CEO gunned down in NYC. That was really distasteful and disrespectful. SNL, you need to do better," another spewed.

LIKE WHAT YOU’RE READING? CLICK HERE FOR MORE ENTERTAINMENT NEWS

Jost also took aim at officials, in particular, the NYPD.

"This week, New York City officials sent a tough message on crime: ‘If you shoot somebody in the middle of the street, you better get on your bike, hop on a bus, and get the heck out of here, mister,’" he began.

"It's also so crazy that the shooting happened three blocks from here in broad daylight, and the guy just bicycled away. Probably because they have every cop in the city guarding our Christmas tree," Jost said, referencing the Christmas Tree Lighting at Rockefeller Plaza, which occurred on the same day.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR THE ENTERTAINMENT NEWSLETTER

"The NYPD now believes the suspect left the city on a bus from Port Authority. Thanks, but a Port Authority passenger who looks like a murderer actually widens the search," Jost said as his final joke on the topic. Additional viewers found the segment to be amusing, with several enjoying the Port Authority joke.

Representatives for "Saturday Night Live" did not immediately return Fox News Digital's request for comment.

CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP 

    Article's Title:
    How many species could go extinct from climate change? It depends on how hot it gets.
    
    Article's Text:
    How many species could go extinct from climate change? It depends on how hot it gets.

toggle caption Education Images/Universal Images Group via Getty/Universal Images Group Editorial

To consider how climate change could cause some extinctions, imagine a tiny mountain bird that eats the berries of a particular mountain tree.

That tree can only grow at a specific elevation around the mountain, where it's evolved over millennia to thrive in that microclimate. As global temperatures rise, both the tree and the bird will be forced to rise too, tracking their microclimate as it moves uphill. But they can only go so far.

"Eventually, they reach the peak, and then there's nowhere else to go," says Mark Urban, a biologist at the University of Connecticut.

Sponsor Message

Scientists call this mountain phenomenon the "escalator to extinction" and it's just one way climate change is already squeezing plants and animals from their habitats. Researchers have conducted hundreds of studies projecting how different species might respond to different levels of climate change, finding varied results. In an analysis published Thursday in the journal Science, Urban sought to bring all those studies together.

"I wanted to get a better overall picture, to provide an answer to decision makers who wanted to know exactly how climate change would translate into extinction risk," he says. That picture is worrisome, he found, especially at higher levels of warming.

"Each of these species has encountered and solved life's problems. They're really the great books of knowledge on Earth," says Urban. "We really don't want to burn those books before we get a chance to read them."

If countries meet the shared goal of limiting warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, 1.8% of species will be at risk of extinction by the end of the century, Urban reports. But if global warming gets out of hand, warming four or five degrees Celsius, as many as 30% of species could be at risk.

"That 30 percent might be the best case scenario of the worst case scenario," says Cristian Román-Palacios, a biological data scientist at the University of Arizona who wasn't involved in the study.

Sponsor Message

He points to confounding complexities in how species might respond to such climate extremes that scientists don't yet know. More critters may simply not be able to cope, or ecosystems that lose species after species may collapse altogether. Additionally, many rare species are understudied, or not even discovered, and might be especially vulnerable in ways that don't show up in this analysis.

Still, "we need broad-scale studies like this," says John Wiens, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Arizona. "If we want to stop the loss of biodiversity, we need to know what the threats are."

In many instances, stopping biodiversity loss means preserving their natural habitats, through protected areas or national parks. That won't necessarily work for saving species from climate change, says Wiens.

"You can protect everything, you can stop all the destruction of rainforests, get everything in preserves, and you could still lose one third of species on Earth," he said. "It requires a more global solution, in terms of stopping carbon emissions."

The globe has already warmed by about 1.3 degrees Celsius from the preindustrial average, which would tip about 1.6% of species towards extinction by 2100, Urban found. If emissions continue at their current trajectory, about one in twenty could blip out of existence. Beyond that, risk really accelerates, underlining the need for climate action, he says. At a more extreme scenario of 4.3 degrees of warming, nearly 15% of species would be imperiled. And at 5.4 degrees of warming, 29.7% of species could die out.

Different species face some different risks. Amphibians, including frogs and salamanders, are more vulnerable, Urban found, perhaps because their habitats are more sensitive to environmental changes. Species that live on islands, mountains and in freshwater could face more challenges, too. Targeted conservation efforts could help slow losses, Urban says, but they're ultimately no substitute for reducing emissions.

Sponsor Message

Scientists have described roughly 2 million species, but that's likely just a fraction of the biodiversity the planet supports. Estimates vary widely, but converge on something like 10 million species. According to Urban's analysis, that would mean the planet is already on track to lose about 160,000 species, and could see nearly 3 million disappear under the worst-case scenario.

"The study presents a clear choice to decision makers," says Urban. "Will we curb emissions now and work to protect that 2% of species that are currently at risk? Or do we choose one of these other paths that will fundamentally alter the nature of our world?"

 

    Article's Title:
    Venezuelan Busted Extorting Illegals In Pennsylvania
    
    Article's Text:
    When a party of four Venezuelans and one Colombian crawled through a hole in a fence at the United States-Mexico border, they knew they were entering the U.S. illegally. But they didn’t know they would become witnesses for the Department of Justice (DOJ) in a human trafficking case against Venezuelan national Cesar David Martinez-Gonzalez of Chester, Pennsylvania.

Gonzalez pled guilty this month to conspiring to illegally bring aliens to the United States and to encourage and induce aliens to enter the United States for private financial gain.

According to the DOJ, Gonzalez helped smuggle “dozens of migrants” from South America to the United States illegally so he could profit from their labor. He faces a maximum of 120 years in prison and will be sentenced March 18.

The five witnesses in the case, whose names and occupations have been sealed by the court at the request of the DOJ, told investigators how they came under Gonzalez’s control.

In September 2022, two married couples and another person arranged to meet human smugglers, known as coyotes, and prepared to cross the Rio Grande River. While crossing the river, the coyotes pointed them to the hole in the fence to cross into the U.S.

Gonzalez paid the coyotes to escort the five to the border, according to the indictment. The fees are $800 for an adult and $600 for a child.

The five, who were apparently all adults, were told that if they were picked up by immigration authorities once in the US, to give the address of their intended destination, which was a residence Gonzalez and his co-conspirators owned.

Indeed, the five were caught and then released by US Customs and Border Protection in Texas, according to the indictment.

Gonzalez and his co-conspirators booked and paid for airplane flights so the illegal aliens could fly to Philadelphia International Airport, the indictment said.

Once in Philadelphia, Gonzalez and his co-conspirators picked them up at the airport, and took them to a residence in Chester used to house aliens.

Gonzalez told the five they owed him “substantial debts for his assistance” and that they should remain in one of the homes he owned and work at jobs he arranged to pay off the debts. The debt was much more than the cost of transporting and housing them, although the indictment did not say how much he demanded.

Gonzalez connected them with “temporary staffing agencies, for the aliens to work in low-paying jobs,” and he obtained false identification documents, including permanent resident cards with false U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services numbers and Social Security cards with fake numbers, the indictment said. It is unknown if they voted, but with these documents, they could have.

He charged them for lodging and transportation, taking about half their weekly wages, the indictment said.

From Illegal Entry To Trafficking Victim

The Federalist asked the DOJ what happened to the five people who entered the country illegally. Will they be sent back to their home country? Will there be more charges related to this smuggling operation, such as against the coyotes, employment agency, or workplace? How have they been managing financially since the arrest? Where did they work?

The DOJ would not give specific details on the case, saying: “While we can’t comment on this case beyond the information in the public filings, every U.S. Attorney’s Office has a Victim/Witness Assistance Program to aid victims of federal crimes. Our office’s victim/witness specialists work to ensure that crime victims and witnesses are afforded their rights, as enumerated in the Crime Victims’ Rights Act, and treated fairly during the prosecution process.”

Art Arthur, the Resident Fellow in Law and Policy at the Center for Immigration Studies, believes the five may have been given immigration protection through a T Visa. Victims of human trafficking who have assisted authorities in an investigation or prosecution of human trafficking cases are eligible for the T Visa.

Holders of a T Visa may remain in the United States for up to four years, and after three years they may apply for permanent resident status, a Green Card. T Visa holders may legally work, and are eligible to bring family members to the United states including their parents, unmarried sibling under 18, and children of any age or marital status related to eligible family members.

In 2000, Congress passed the Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA), which makes trafficking victims eligible for taxpayer funded benefits, including free food from the SNAP card; free health care; job training; free or low cost housing and money from either from Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), or the Refugee Cash Assistance (RCA) program.

“New Age Slavery’

Most illegal immigrants do not understand they are getting involved in a trafficking scheme, Arthur said.

“The way to come to the U.S. illegally is, you generally have to pay a coyote — a smuggler — to come to the United States, to make your way through all of that,” said Arthur, a former immigration judge who heard thousands of related cases. “Most people don’t have all the money to pay the smuggler, so the deal that they cut is that they will pay part of the smuggling fee and then they will work off the rest of it. The problem is, often that working off the rest means debt bondage in the United States, and it can be debt bondage that you can never get your way out of.”

Trafficking — modern day slavery in the United States — is a byproduct of an unchecked open border, and President Joe Biden’s policies have invited more trafficking.

Biden announced the Processes for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans, and Venezuelans (CHNV), program in Jan. 2023, which allows people from those countries who have a sponsor in the U.S. and pass a background check to come to the U.S. for two years.

“This is a program that is amazingly vulnerable to trafficking — forced sex, whatever else, any hell you can imagine, this program is vulnerable to it,” Artur said. “You have to have a sponsor in the United States. You don’t have to be related to that sponsor. You don’t even have to know that sponsor. That sponsor doesn’t even have to be a United States citizen. That sponsor doesn’t even have to be here. I mean, if you … wanted to lure people into being trafficked, this is the best way to do it.”

He said the same is true of Biden’s catch and release policy, where he said more than 88 percent of people apprehended while entering illegally were released into the U.S. Many end up paying a smuggler to get to their destination and get trapped in debt bondage.

“It is just ripe for trafficking.”

“Part of the reason why people who enter illegally aren’t supposed to be released for custody until they’re granted asylum, is because we don’t want to encourage people to hand themselves over to smugglers. Smugglers are bad people. They will rob you. They will beat you. They will rape you. They will do everything bad,” Arthur said. “If they’re traffickers, that doesn’t end on this side of the border. For traffickers, all those hells continue on this side of the border.”

President-elect Donald Trump has nominated his former Director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Tom Homan, to lead border enforcement. Arthur says detaining people who have entered the U.S. illegally until it is determined if they should be allowed into the country would be a “gut punch” to trafficking. And although he has not heard Trump or Homan speak to this yet, Arthur recommends ending the CHNV program due to its exploitation by traffickers.

“This is new age slavery; 159 years after the 14th Amendment, we are still faced with this scourge. And unfortunately, the immigration policies of the current administration facilitate trafficking,” Arthur said.

Beth Brelje is an elections correspondent for The Federalist. She is an award-winning investigative journalist with decades of media experience. 

    Article's Title:
    Trump says he can’t guarantee tariffs won’t raise US prices and won’t rule out revenge prosecutions
    
    Article's Text:
    WASHINGTON (AP) — Donald Trump said he can’t guarantee that his promised tariffs on key U.S. foreign trade partners won’t raise prices for American consumers and he suggested once more that some political rivals and federal officials who pursued legal cases against him should be imprisoned.

The president-elect, in a wide-ranging interview with NBC’s “Meet the Press” that aired Sunday, also touched on monetary policy, immigration, abortion and health care, and U.S. involvement in Ukraine, Israel and elsewhere.

Trump often mixed declarative statements with caveats, at one point cautioning “things do change.”

A look at some of the issues covered:

Trump hems on whether trade penalties could raise prices

Trump has threatened broad trade penalties, but said he didn’t believe economists’ predictions that added costs on those imported goods for American companies would lead to higher prices for U.S. consumers. He stopped short of a pledge that U.S. households won’t be paying more as they shop.

“I can’t guarantee anything. I can’t guarantee tomorrow,” Trump said, seeming to open the door to accepting the reality of how import levies typically work as goods reach the retail market.

Shipping containers are stacked at a port in Tianjin, China, Jan. 16, 2023. (AP Photo/Mark Schiefelbein, File) Shipping containers are stacked at a port in Tianjin, China, Jan. 16, 2023. (AP Photo/Mark Schiefelbein, File) Share Share Copy Link copied

Email

Facebook

X

Reddit

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Flipboard

Print Read More Trucks cross the International Bridge from Mexico into the United States, Tuesday, Nov. 26, 2024, in Eagle Pass, Texas. (AP Photo/Eric Gay) Trucks cross the International Bridge from Mexico into the United States, Tuesday, Nov. 26, 2024, in Eagle Pass, Texas. (AP Photo/Eric Gay) Share Share Copy Link copied

Email

Facebook

X

Reddit

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Flipboard

Print Read More

That’s a different approach from Trump’s typical speeches throughout the 2024 campaign, when he framed his election as a sure way to curb inflation.

In the interview, Trump defended tariffs generally, saying they are “going to make us rich.”

He has pledged that, on his first day in office in January, he would impose 25% tariffs on all goods imported from Mexico and Canada unless those countries satisfactorily stop illegal immigration and the flow of illegal drugs such as fentanyl into the United States. He also has threatened additional tariffs on China to help force that country to crack down on fentanyl production.

”All I want to do is I want to have a level, fast, but fair playing field,” Trump said.

Trump suggests retribution for his opponents while claiming no interest in vengeance

He offered conflicting statements on how he would approach the justice system after winning election despite being convicted of 34 felonies in a New York state court and being indicted in other cases for his handling of national security secrets and efforts to overturn his 2020 loss to Democrat Joe Biden.

“Honestly, they should go to jail,” Trump said of members of Congress who investigated the Capitol riot by his supporters who wanted him to remain in power.

The president-elect underscored his contention that he can use the justice system against others, including special prosecutor Jack Smith, who led the case on Trump’s role in the siege on Jan. 6, 2021. Trump confirmed his plan to pardon supporters who were convicted for their roles in the riot, saying he would take that action on his first day in office.

As for the idea of revenge driving potential prosecutions, Trump said: “I have the absolute right. I’m the chief law enforcement officer, you do know that. I’m the president. But I’m not interested in that.”

At the same time, Trump singled out lawmakers on a special House committee who had investigated the insurrection, citing Rep. Bennie Thompson, D-Miss., and former Rep. Liz Cheney, R-Wyo.

“Cheney was behind it ... so was Bennie Thompson and everybody on that committee,” Trump said.

Asked specifically whether he would direct his administration to pursue cases, he said, “No,” and suggested he did not expect the FBI to quickly undertake investigations into his political enemies.

But at another point, Trump said he would leave the matter up to Pam Bondi, his pick as attorney general. “I want her to do what she wants to do,” he said.

Such threats, regardless of Trump’s inconsistencies, have been taken seriously enough by many top Democrats that Biden is considering issuing blanket, preemptive pardons to protect key members of his outgoing administration.

Trump did seemingly back off his campaign rhetoric calling for Biden to be investigated, saying, “I’m not looking to go back into the past.”

Swift action on immigration is coming

Trump repeatedly mentioned his promises to seal the U.S.-Mexico border and deport millions of people who are in the U.S. illegally through a mass deportation program.

“I think you have to do it,” he said.

He suggested he would try to use executive action to end “birthright” citizenship under which people born in the U.S. are considered citizens — although such protections are spelled out in the Constitution.

Immigration advocates hold a rally in Sacramento, Calif. on Monday, Dec. 2, 2024, to protest President-Elect Donald Trump’s plans to conduct mass deportation of immigrants without legal status. (AP Photo/Haven Daley) Immigration advocates hold a rally in Sacramento, Calif. on Monday, Dec. 2, 2024, to protest President-Elect Donald Trump’s plans to conduct mass deportation of immigrants without legal status. (AP Photo/Haven Daley) Share Share Copy Link copied

Email

Facebook

X

Reddit

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Flipboard

Print Read More

Asked specifically about the future for people who were brought into the country illegally as children and have been shielded from deportation in recent years, Trump said, “I want to work something out,” indicating he might seek a solution with Congress.

But Trump also said he does not “want to be breaking up families” of mixed legal status, “so the only way you don’t break up the family is you keep them together and you have to send them all back.”

Trump commits to NATO, with conditions, and waffles on Putin and Ukraine

Long a critic of NATO members for not spending more on their own defense, Trump said he “absolutely” would remain in the alliance “if they pay their bills.”

Pressed on whether he would withdraw if he were dissatisfied with allies’ commitments, Trump said he wants the U.S. treated “fairly” on trade and defense.

He waffled on a NATO priority of containing Russia and President Vladimir Putin.

President-elect Donald Trump shakes hands with Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Notre Dame Cathedral as France’s iconic cathedral is formally reopening its doors for the first time since a devastating fire nearly destroyed the 861-year-old landmark in 2019, Saturday Dec.7, 2024 in Paris ( Ludovic Marin, Pool via AP) President-elect Donald Trump shakes hands with Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Notre Dame Cathedral as France’s iconic cathedral is formally reopening its doors for the first time since a devastating fire nearly destroyed the 861-year-old landmark in 2019, Saturday Dec.7, 2024 in Paris ( Ludovic Marin, Pool via AP) Share Share Copy Link copied

Email

Facebook

X

Reddit

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Flipboard

Print Read More

Trump suggested Ukraine should prepare for less U.S. aid in its defense against Putin’s invasion. “Possibly. Yeah, probably. Sure,” Trump said of reducing Ukraine assistance from Washington. Separately, Trump has called for an immediate ceasefire.

Asked about Putin, Trump said initially that he has not talked to the Russian leader since Election Day last month, but then hedged: “I haven’t spoken to him recently.” Trump said when pressed, adding that he did not want to “impede the negotiation.”

Trump says Powell is safe at the Fed, but not Wray at the FBI

The president-elect said he has no intention, at least for now, of asking Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell to step down before Powell’s term ends in 2028. Trump said during the campaign that presidents should have more say in Fed policy, including interest rates.

Trump did not offer any job assurances for FBI Director Christopher Wray, whose term is to end in 2027.

Asked about Wray, Trump said: “Well, I mean, it would sort of seem pretty obvious” that if the Senate confirms Kash Patel as his pick for FBI chief, then “he’s going to be taking somebody’s place, right? Somebody is the man that you’re talking about.”

Trump is absolute about Social Security, not so much on abortion and health insurance

Trump promised that the government efficiency effort led by Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy will not threaten Social Security. “We’re not touching Social Security, other than we make it more efficient,” he said. He added that “we’re not raising ages or any of that stuff.”

He was not so specific about abortion or his long-promised overhaul of the Affordable Care Act.

On abortion, Trump continued his inconsistencies and said he would “probably” not move to restrict access to the abortion pills that now account for a majority of pregnancy terminations, according to the Guttmacher Institute, which supports abortion rights. But pressed on whether he would commit to that position, Trump replied, “Well, I commit. I mean, are -- things do -- things change. I think they change.”

Reprising a line from his Sept. 10 debate against Vice President Kamala Harris, Trump again said he had “concepts” of a plan to substitute for the 2010 Affordable Care Act, which he called “lousy health care.”

He added a promise that any Trump version would maintain insurance protections for Americans with preexisting health conditions. He did not explain how such a design would be different from the status quo or how he could deliver on his desire for “better health care for less money.”

___

Barrow reported from Atlanta. Associated Press writers Adriana Gomez Licon in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Jill Colvin and Michelle L. Price in New York contributed to this report. 

    Article's Title:
    Will Donald Trump kill US-UK-Aussie sub defense deal?
    
    Article's Text:
    Trump does not appear to have publicly commented on the AUKUS pact — named for its contingent parts Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States — which would see the U.S. share technology with its partners to allow both countries to build state-of-the-art nuclear submarines by the 2040s.

This uncertainty has left ministers and government officials in London and Canberra scrambling to discover how the Republican is likely to view the Biden-era deal when he returns to the White House in January.

Two defense industry figures told POLITICO there were serious concerns in the British government that Trump might seek to renegotiate the deal or alter the timelines.

This is because the pact likely requires the U.S. to temporarily downsize its own naval fleet as a part of the agreement — something Trump may interpret as an affront to his “America First” ideology.

Looking east

There is hope in Westminster that Trump would be in favor of a military project which is an obvious, if unspoken, challenge to China.

The deal would see American-designed nuclear submarines right on China's doorstep and would form a part of Australia's attempts to bolster its military might in the Indo-Pacific. 

    Article's Title:
    Democrats and Republicans in Congress worried that Gabbard might leak to Assad regime
    
    Article's Text:
    Democrats and Republicans in Congress worried that Gabbard might leak to Assad regime

In the spring of 2018, congressional staffers were anxious ahead of a House Foreign Affairs Committee meeting.

A Syrian defector who had risked his life to expose atrocities committed by the Assad regime was due to appear behind closed doors at a private briefing for lawmakers.

No cameras would be present, but congressional aides worried about one committee member, Democratic Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, who had repeatedly defended the Syrian regime and even met its leader, Bashar al-Assad, in an unannounced trip in 2017.

The aides were concerned Gabbard might leak information about the defector, who had hidden his identity out of fear of reprisals from the Assad regime. Some worried that she might even reveal his identity to someone associated with the Syrian government, which at that point had killed hundreds of thousands of its own citizens, according to human rights groups.

ADVERTISEMENT

Both Democratic and Republican aides told the Syrians accompanying the defector, known as “Caesar,” to ensure that he covered his face before Gabbard entered the room — just in case.

“It was Democratic and Republican staffers on the committee coordinating with me to figure out how do we make sure that Tulsi doesn’t take a photograph of Caesar, or learn his real name, or record his voice,” said Mouaz Moustafa, executive director of the Syrian Emergency Task Force who helped organize Caesar’s appearance and translated for the session.

In the past, Caesar had spoken privately to members of Congress without his face covered when Gabbard was not present. But not at the special briefing in the summer of 2018.

A Syrian military defector using the pseudonym Caesar, while also wearing a hood to protect his identity, testifies about the war in Syria during a Senate Foreign Relations committee hearing on Capitol Hill in 2020.

“There were bipartisan concerns for Caesar’s safety,” a former staffer who was involved in the discussions and asked not to be named. “Most specifically, because then congresswoman Gabbard had earlier returned from Damascus and met with Assad,” the former staffer told NBC News.

ADVERTISEMENT

The episode reflects the deep misgivings that many lawmakers, intelligence officials and human rights activists have harbored for years about Gabbard.

Now, President-elect Donald Trump has nominated the former lawmaker to serve as the country’s highest-ranking intelligence official. If confirmed, Gabbard would have access to a trove of top secret material and have the final word on what spy agencies share with the president in regular intelligence briefings.

A spokesperson for the Trump transition team said Gabbard, a lieutenant colonel in the Army Reserve, has an active top secret security clearance and has never breached the confidentiality rules around classified information.

“As someone who served for eight years in the U.S. House of Representatives and attended many classified briefings, there is zero evidence that confidentiality has ever been violated,” said spokesperson Alexa Henning.

Asked about the case of congressional staffers in 2018 who were concerned she might not safeguard the Syrian defector’s anonymity, she said: “This is another smear by anonymous officials with no proof.”

ADVERTISEMENT

As a presidential candidate, a member of Congress and a commentator supporting Donald Trump’s campaign, Gabbard has been accused of repeatedly echoing propaganda spread by Russia and the Assad regime, including questioning U.S. intelligence assessments that the Syrian government carried out multiple chemical weapons attacks on its own people.

On Thursday, nearly 100 former diplomats, national security officials and intelligence officials wrote to Senate leaders expressing alarm at Gabbard’s nomination. The former officials, who have served under both Democratic and Republican administrations, urged closed-door confirmation hearings to allow lawmakers to carry out a full review of government information about Gabbard.

“Several of Ms. Gabbard’s past actions call into question her ability to deliver unbiased intelligence briefings to the President, Congress, and to the entire national security apparatus,” the letter stated.

At a moment of historic upheaval in the Middle East with Syrian rebel forces toppling the Damascus regime and Assad fleeing the country, Gabbard’s views on Syria — and its former Russian and Iranian patrons — will be under fresh scrutiny as senators weigh her nomination. She is expected to begin meeting with lawmakers next week in advance of her confirmation hearings.

Henning, the spokesperson for Gabbard on the transition team, dismissed the letter as an “unfounded” attack by people who oversaw foreign policy and intelligence debacles in the past, including the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

A Syrian defector named "Caesar" meets with House Foreign Affairs Committee members on Capitol Hill in 2018.

“These unfounded attacks are from the same geniuses who have blood on their hands from decades of faulty ‘intelligence,’ including the non-existent weapons of mass destruction,” said Henning, referring to a purported justification for the start of the Iraq War that turned out to be false.

A rising Democratic star

In 2012, after a surprise election victory as Hawaii’s new congresswoman at the age of 31, Gabbard was seen as a rising young star in the Democratic Party, a fresh face who had served in the Iraq War with the Army National Guard.

ADVERTISEMENT

During her early days in Congress, Gabbard was part of a bipartisan exercise group in the House. She was also often invited to informal gatherings of a small group of Democrats favoring a moderate foreign policy.

Gabbard appeared even-keeled in her manner and there was no sign she had any predisposition toward authoritarian regimes or bought into their propaganda, according to those who knew her at the time.

“Every time you talked to her you just felt like this is a measured, thoughtful person. Not prone to hyperbole, not prone to get overly excited or angry,” said Democratic Rep. Seth Moulton of Massachusetts, also a veteran of the Iraq War. “Exactly the kind of attitude and demeanor that I grew to expect from the military.”

Her arrival in Congress coincided with Syria’s descent into civil war.

The Assad regime brutally crushed peaceful political protests in 2011, firing on unarmed demonstrators and carrying out mass arrests and torture. The crackdown led the opposition to take up arms and an all-out war, with the regime launching chemical weapons attacks and Russian-backed air raids on Syrian cities and towns.

As the war intensified, Gabbard’s sympathetic statements about the Russian-backed Assad regime raised eyebrows and alarmed her colleagues.

In 2014, Gabbard first encountered the defector Caesar at a hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, where he appeared before cameras with his face covered to shield his identity.

Citing some 50,000 photographs smuggled out of Syria, Caesar outlined how the regime had executed and tortured tens of thousands of Syrians who dared to oppose the regime.

Gabbard praised his “courage” and asked Caesar if armed rebels were strong enough to take on Assad. Caesar assured her that they were strong because they believed in their cause and that their cause was “just.”

In 2015, Gabbard was invited on a congressional trip to the Turkish-Syrian border, where she and other members met medical workers, activists and wounded civilians who recounted the fallout from the Assad regime’s military attacks. Syrian human rights advocates hoped the trip might lead her to reconsider her views.

Gabbard was part of a congressional delegation in Gaziantep, Turkey, near the Syrian border in June 2015.

Gabbard and the other lawmakers traveled to Gaziantep, just over the border from Syria, and spoke to Syrian civilians who had been forced to flee their homes. She took notes and nodded politely but rarely spoke, according to Moustafa, who accompanied the delegation.

Although the trip took place nine years ago, one exchange has stayed with Moustafa. Two Syrian girls described suffering severe burns when aircraft bombed their displaced persons camp.

“She asked them, ‘How do you know it was the Russians and Assad who did it and not ISIS?’” Moustafa said.

Gabbard’s question shocked Moustafa, as the lawmaker did not say anything else to the children. And Gabbard’s intervention showed how badly informed she was, he said. ISIS had no air force.

“After that conversation with the little girls, I saw there was nothing to be done,” Moustafa said. He concluded that “facts don’t matter” to Gabbard and there was no way to shift her view. He added it would be “dangerous” for Gabbard to be given the top U.S. intelligence job.

Washington Post columnist Josh Rogin first reported on the exchange.

Gabbard’s spokesperson called the account of the conversation with the Syrian children “false.”

Afterward, Gabbard did not publicly refer to what she and the other members of the delegation saw and heard firsthand from Syrian civilians. Two years later, she made an unannounced trip to meet Assad, the leader of Syria accused of orchestrating large-scale atrocities.

By the time of her 2017 visit, U.S. diplomatic relations with Syria had been suspended for five years and Russian air power, Iran’s Revolutionary Guard troops and Lebanese Hezbollah fighters had shored up Assad’s forces.

Gabbard did not tell most of her Democratic colleagues about the trip. Syrian-Americans linked to a pro-regime party paid for her flight and hotel and organized her meetings. After news of the trip became public and Gabbard came under criticism, she said she repaid the cost of the trip in full.

The Trump transition spokesperson said Gabbard handled the trip in accordance with congressional rules.

“She did everything that was required of any Member (of Congress) going on foreign travel by getting the itinerary and trip approved by House Ethics Committee prior to travel and submitting post trip reports upon returning,” Henning said. “She also met with the U.S. Ambassador in Lebanon.”

Henning added: “Due to security concerns and active terrorist activity that would compromise the safety of everyone on the trip if it were leaked in advance, she kept the trip under close hold.”

Tulsi Gabbard at Capitol Hill in 2018.

Following her meeting with Assad, Gabbard defended her trip in interviews at the time and said she was “skeptical” that Syria was responsible for a chemical weapons attack that killed dozens of people.

U.S. intelligence agencies, the United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons concluded that the Assad regime was behind that attack, as well as multiple other attacks.

She also embraced the Assad regime’s line that the war was a struggle against Islamist terrorists. Speaking about her trip in 2017, Gabbard told CNN that “people of all ages they asked me, ‘why is the United States and its allies supporting these terrorist groups who are destroying Syria, when it was Al-Qaeda who attacked the United States on 9/11 not Syria?’ I didn’t have an answer for them.”

The United States waged an air war against ISIS extremists in Syria and Iraq and did not support terrorists in Syria.

The Obama administration did provide limited assistance and training to some Syrian armed groups that Washington deemed as moderate forces opposing Assad. But the military aid ended in 2017 and anti-regime forces splintered, with hardline Islamists taking on a prominent role.

In an interview with journalist Ryan Grimm after her 2017 meeting with Assad, Gabbard aid that during her conversation with the Syrian president, she challenged him to hold free and fair elections with international observers and that Assad agreed. No such elections have taken place.

Gabbard has rejected accusations that she is aligned with authoritarian leaders or undermining U.S. interests. She maintains she is coming under attack for questioning Washington’s establishment and opposing U.S. military “regime change” interventions including the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq.

“Lt. Col. Gabbard has seen the casualties of war firsthand, and like President Trump, is committed to peace and preventing endless wars,” Henning said.

Concerns among lawmakers and intelligence officials

Several Republicans have indicated they will enthusiastically support Gabbard’s nomination. But Republican Sen. James Lankford of Oklahoma, a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said he would like to know more about her 2017 meeting with Assad.

“We’ll have lots of questions. She met with Bashar Assad, we’ll want to know what the purpose was and what the direction for that was, as a member of Congress,” Lankford told CNN.

One former senior intelligence official said Gabbard’s statements on Syria called into question her willingness to accept facts that don’t fit her world view.

“She basically completely adopted the Assad regime propaganda, where she suggested falsely that the U.S. was supporting terrorist extremists in Syria, and didn’t mention that the Assad regime had been slaughtering fellow Syrians there,” the former official said. “So what does that say about her judgment?”

Some lawmakers and former intelligence officials say they worry that America’s partners, including those in the vital “Five Eyes” intelligence alliance -- the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand -- may choose to withhold some sensitive information if they distrusted Gabbard as director of intelligence.

Nikki Haley, the former Republican governor of South Carolina who served as ambassador to the United Nations in the first Trump administration, has sharply criticized Gabbard’s nomination, saying her statements showed she was not ready to assess threats to the United States.

“After Russia invaded Ukraine, Tulsi Gabbard literally blamed NATO, our western alliance that’s responsible for countering Russia,” Haley said on her Sirius XM radio show last week. “She blamed NATO for the attack on Ukraine, and the Russians and the Chinese echoed her talking points and her interviews on Russian and Chinese television.”

She added: “This is not a place for a Russian, Iranian, Syrian, Chinese sympathizer.”





This story has been updated to reflect the fall of the Assad regime in Syria.





This article was originally published on NBCNews.com 

    Article's Title:
    The world has been warming faster than expected. Scientists now think they know why
    
    Article's Text:
    The world has been warming faster than expected. Scientists now think they know why

Clouds over the Atlantic Ocean at sunrise in Lido Beach, New York, September 23, 2022.

Last year was the hottest on record, oceans boiled, glaciers melted at alarming rates, and it left scientists scrambling to understand exactly why.

They know the extraordinary heat was fueled by a number of factors, predominantly planet-heating pollution from burning fossil fuels and the natural climate pattern El Niño. B ut those alone did not explain the unusually rapid temperature rise.

Now a new study published Thursday in the journal Science says it has identified the missing part of the puzzle: clouds.

To be more specific, the rapid surge in warming was supercharged by a dearth of low-lying clouds over the oceans, according to the research — findings which may have alarming implications for future warming.

ADVERTISEMENT

In simple terms, fewer bright, low clouds mean the planet “has darkened,” allowing it to absorb more sunlight, said Helge Goessling, a report author and climate physicist at the Alfred Wegener Institute in Germany.

This phenomenon is called “albedo” and refers to the ability of surfaces to reflect the sun’s energy back into space.

The Earth’s albedo has been declining since the 1970s, according to the report, due in part to the melting of light-colored snow and sea ice, exposing darker land and water which absorb more of the sun’s energy, heating up the planet.

Low clouds also feed into this effect as they reflect away sunlight.

The scientists scoured NASA satellite data, weather data and climate models and found the decline in low clouds reduced the planet’s albedo to record lows last year. Areas including parts of the North Atlantic Ocean experienced a particularly significant fall, the study found.

ADVERTISEMENT

Last year fits into a decade-long decline of low cloud cover, Goessling told CNN.

What the study can’t yet explain for certain is why this is happening. “This is such a complex beast and so hard to disentangle,” Goessling said.

He believes it is likely the result of a combination of factors. The first is a reduction in shipping pollution due to regulations aimed at reducing the industry’s harmful sulfur emissions. While this has been a win for human health, this type of pollution was also helping cool the planet by brightening clouds.

Natural climate variabilities, including changing ocean patterns, may also have contributed. But Goessling points to a third, more alarming factor: global warming itself.

Low-level clouds tend to thrive in a cool and moist lower atmosphere. As the planet’s surface heats up, this can cause them to thin or dissipate entirely, setting up a complicated feedback loop where low clouds are disappearing because of global warming, and their disappearance then drives further warming.

ADVERTISEMENT

If this is happening, future warming projections may be underestimated and “we should expect rather intense warming in the future,” Goessling said.

Mark Zalinka, an atmospheric scientist at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory who was not involved in the study, said “the fact that clouds play a key role in the story makes sense, as they essentially act as Earth’s sunscreen.”

Small changes in cloud cover can “drastically change Earth’s albedo,” he told CNN.

Tapio Schneider, a climate scientist at the California Institute of Technology, said the worrying implication of the research is if global warming is responsible for a substantial amount of cloud cover change, “we may see stronger global warming than previously predicted.”

Clouds may seem simple, even mundane, but they are endlessly complex and scientists remain far from unraveling how they behave. They are “one of the biggest headaches” in climate science, Goessling said.

ADVERTISEMENT

But figuring out how clouds will respond to global warming is key, Zalkina said. “It literally determines how much future warming is in store.”

For more CNN news and newsletters create an account at CNN.com 

    Article's Title:
    Are you a robot?
    
    Article's Text:
    Why did this happen?

Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy. 

    Article's Title:
    New House bill would ban insurers from limiting anesthesia coverage: ‘Purpose of medicine is to prevent pain’
    
    Article's Text:
    A new House bill would ban health insurers from imposing arbitrary time limits on patients under anesthesia — days after Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield only backed off the move amid outcry.

“We cannot trust insurers to do right by doctors and patients out of the kindness of their hearts,” Rep. Ritchie Torres (D-Bronx), who is sponsoring the bill, told The Post.

“There is a need for legislation that prevents any insurer anywhere in America from micromanaging the length of anesthesia care in a medically necessary surgery,” Torres said. “The purpose of medicine should be to prevent pain, rather than cause it through the denial of anesthesia.”

6 Bronx Rep. Ritchie Torres is sponsoring a bill that would ban health insurers from putting time limits on coverage for patients under anesthesia during surgeries. Matthew McDermott

6 The bill comes after Anthem Blue Cross Shield backed off an attempt at putting limites on anesthesia. Getty Images

The congressman’s “Anesthesia for All Act” would prohibit health insurers from determining how long a person can stay under anesthesia, threatening to withhold reimbursement if they go beyond it.

Anesthesia keeps patients from feeling pain during surgery or other procedures through heavy sedation or being temporarily put to sleep.

The proposed law would ensure reimbursement for costs is based on medical necessity as determined by the attending anesthesiologist and prohibit insurers from denying payment solely because the length of surgery or care exceeds their pre-set limit.

The furor over Anthem Blue Cross Shield’s aborted cap erupted about the same time that UnitedHealthcare CEO Brian Thompson was gunned down and killed in front of the Hilton hotel last week.

6 UnitedHealthcare CEO Brian Thompson was shot and killed in Manhattan last week. Linkedin / Brian Thompson

6 Security footage of the suspect murdering Thompson. Obtained by NY Post

Authorties have said Thompson may have been murdered by a disgruntled customer — and the Internet promptly blew up with people noting how many patients have been treated poorly by the behemoth medical industry.

Torres, 36, is considering a run for governor in 2026 and has not ruled running for mayor.

Gov. Kathy Hochul had slammed Anthem for its proposed policy shift, too, and the company’s reversal came after her office contacted the insurer, she said.

6 The person who killed Thompson is still on the loose. DCPI

“I shared my outrage at a plan from Anthem to strip away coverage from New Yorkers who had to go under anesthesia for surgery. We pushed Anthem to reverse course and today they will be announcing a full reversal of this misguided policy,” the governor said on X last week.

“Don’t mess with the health and well-being of New Yorkers — not on my watch.”

In recent weeks, Torres has publicly criticized fellow Democrat Hochul “as the new Joe Biden” who could lose to a Republican if she seeks re-election.

6 Gov. Kathy Hochul blasted Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield after its policy was announced. Matthew McDermott

He has said both the city and state are poorly governed and that New York regulations “make it impossible to do business.”

Torres last month also slammed the administrations of Adams and Hochul and New York city and state lawmakers as “complicit” in the murders of three innocent people by serial stabber Ramon Rivera during a citywide rampage. He said city and state policies and laws allowed the crazed deadly Rivera to slip through the cracks and go on a killing spree.

The congressman has moderated from lefty positions he held earlier in his political career about illegal immigration/border security and policing. For example, Torres disavowed defunding the police nearly three years ago — well before eyeing a run for governor. 

    Article's Title:
    House Republican Shrugs Off Pete Hegseth's 'Indiscretions': 'I Hope He Holds The Line'
    
    Article's Text:
    Don't let this be the end of the free press. The free press is under attack — and America's future hangs in the balance. As other newsrooms bow to political pressure, HuffPost is not backing down.

Would you help us keep our news free for all? We can't do it without you.

Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read. 

    Article's Title:
    AI’s environmental footprint: How much energy does it take to run ChatGPT?
    
    Article's Text:
    The tension between AI and climate is growing. Google data center in the Netherlands. Intreegue Photography / Shutterstock

Gordon Noble, University of Technology Sydney and Fiona Berry, University of Technology Sydney

Since the release of ChatGPT in November 2022, the world has seen an incredible surge in investment, development and use of artificial intelligence (AI) applications. According to one estimate, the amount of computational power used for AI is doubling roughly every 100 days.

The social and economic impacts of this boom have provoked reactions around the world. European regulators recently pushed Meta to pause plans to train AI models on users’ Facebook and Instagram data. The Bank of International Settlements, which coordinates the world’s central banks, has warned AI adoption may change the way inflation works.

The environmental impacts have so far received less attention. A single query to an AI-powered chatbot can use up to ten times as much energy as an old-fashioned Google search.

Broadly speaking, a generative AI system may use 33 times more energy to complete a task than it would take with traditional software. This enormous demand for energy translates into surges in carbon emissions and water use, and may place further stress on electricity grids already strained by climate change.

Energy and carbon emissions

Most AI applications run on servers in data centers. In 2023, before the AI boom really kicked off, the International Energy Agency estimated data centers already accounted for 1–1.5% of global electricity use and around 1% of the world’s energy-related CO₂ emissions.

For comparison, in 2022, the aviation sector accounted for 2% of global energy-related CO₂ emissions while the steel sector was responsible for 7–9%.

How is the rapid growth in AI use changing these figures? Recent environmental reporting by Microsoft, Meta and Google provides some insight.

Microsoft has significant investments in AI, with a large stake in ChatGPT-maker OpenAI as well as its own Copilot applications for Windows. Between 2020 and 2023, Microsoft’s disclosed annual emissions increased by around 40%, from the equivalent of 12.2 million tonnes of CO₂ to 17.1 million tonnes.

These figures include not only direct emissions but also indirect emissions, such as those caused by generating the electricity used to run data centers and those that result from the use of the company’s products. (These three categories of emissions are referred to as Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions, respectively.)

Meta too is sinking huge resources into AI. In 2023, the company disclosed is Scope 3 emissions had increased by over 65% in just two years, from the equivalent of 5 million tonnes of CO₂ in 2020 to 8.4 million tonnes in 2022.

Google’s emissions were almost 50% higher in 2023 than in 2019. The tech giant’s 2024 environmental report notes that planned emissions reductions will be difficult “due to increasing energy demands from the greater intensity of AI compute”.

LEARN MORE Michigan House OK’s data center tax break that advocates say threatens climate goals Critics say water and power-hungry data centers could increase prices for utility customers, deplete groundwater and compromise Michigan’s renewable energy targets.

Lots of water

Data centers generate a lot of heat and consume large amounts of water to cool their servers. According to a 2021 study, data centers in the United States use about 7,100 liters of water for each megawatt-hour of energy they consume.

Google’s US data centers alone consumed an estimated 12.7 billion liters of fresh water in 2021.

In regions where climate change is increasing water stress, the water use of data centers is becoming a particular concern. The recent drought in California, where many tech companies are based, has led companies including Google, Amazon and Meta to start “water positive” initiatives.

These big tech firms have announced commitments to replenish more water than they consume by 2030. Their plans include projects such as designing ecologically resilient watershed landscapes and improving community water conservation to improve water security.

AI and climate

Where data centres are located in or near cities, they may also end up competing with people for resources in times of scarcity. Extreme heat events are one example.

Globally, the total number of days above 50°C has increased in each decade since 1980. July 2023 was the hottest month ever recorded.

Extreme heat translates to health impacts on local populations. A Lancet 2022 study found that even a 1°C increase in temperature is positively associated with increased mortality and morbidity.

On days of extreme heat, air conditioning can save lives. Data centers also like to keep cool, so their power use will spike with the temperature, raising the risk of blackouts and instability in electricity grids.

What’s next?

So what now? As we have seen, tech companies are increasingly aware of the issue. How is that translating into action?

When we surveyed Australian sustainability professionals in July 2023, we found only 6% believed data centre operators provided detailed sustainability data.

Earlier this year we surveyed IT managers in Australia and New Zealand to ask what they thought about how AI applications are driving increased energy use. We found 72% are already adopting or piloting AI technologies.

More than two-thirds (68%) said they were concerned about increased energy consumption for AI needs. However, there is also significant uncertainty about the size of the increase.

Many IT managers also lack the necessary skills to adequately address these sustainability impacts, regardless of corporate sustainability commitments. Education and training for IT managers to understand and address the sustainability impacts of AI is urgently required.

Gordon Noble, Research Director, Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney and Fiona Berry, Research Principal, Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney

This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons license. Read the original article.

Sign me up for Planet Detroit’s free weekly email newsletter 
